ECE 315
Steven Knudsen, PhD, PEng


Lecture 29 :
• Analogue/Digital conversion
• ADCs, DACs




                                1
Last Lecture

• Interrupts and Events




                          2




                              2
This Lecture

• Analogue/Digital conversion
• ADCs, DACs




                                3




                                    3
 Learning Objectives
• Distinguish between analogue and digital signals
• Explain the motivations for analogue-to-digital and digital-to-analogue
  conversion
• Describe the fundamentals of sampling theory
   • Apply the Nyquist–Shannon sampling theorem
• Identify practical limitations of real ADC systems, including trade-offs
  between
   • sampling rate and resolution, quantization levels, noise, and
   • embedded system constraints such as ADC speed, DMA bandwidth, & CPU load
• Explain why anti-aliasing and reconstruction filters are needed

                                                                             4




                                                                                 4
This is our main topic for until past Reading Week.




                                                      5
Why do we care about Analogue vs Digital?

• The world is for practical purposes analogue in nature
• Yes, there are analogue computers, but they are difficult to build and
  even more difficult to program
• Digital signal processing and by extension digital computers are so
  much easier to deal with
• Digital techniques, computing scales extraordinarily well, both in
  capability and cost
   • Many embedded systems are actually overkill in terms of what the
     microprocessor could do versus what it is asked to do


                                                                           6




                                                                               6
The wireless data signal, which is analogue between the transmitter and receiver,
starts as digital signal at the transmitter, is converted to analogue and transmitted, is
received and then converted to digital




                                                                                            11
Sampling Theory Refresher
• Sampling converts a continuous-time signal x(t) into a discrete-time
  sequence x[n]
• Performed by measuring the signal at regular intervals:
                                𝑥 𝑛 = 𝑥 𝑛𝑇!
where
                                                   "
  • 𝑇! is the sample period in seconds, and 𝑓! =        is the sampling frequency (Hz)
                                                   #!

• Common examples:
  • ADCs sampling sensor voltages
  • Audio signals sampled at 44.1 kHz or 48 kHz

                                                                         Made with help from ChatGPT   16




                                                                                                            16
Nyquist-Shannon Sampling Theorem
• A band-limited signal with maximum frequency fmax can be perfectly
  reconstructed if
                                𝑓! ≥ 2𝑓"#$
• If sampling is too slow aliasing occurs
   • high-frequency components appear as lower frequencies (said to ”wrap”)
• In practical applications, we need anti-aliasing filters that ensure
                                 𝑓!
                                    ≥ 𝑓"#$
                                 2
• Rule of thumb
   • Sample at 2–10 times fmax for margin and filter roll-off
• Special case is if a signal is bandlimited and bandpass in nature
                    • Outside the scope of this course            Made with help from ChatGPT   17




                                                                                                     17
https://dataphysics.com/blog/dynamic-signal-analysis/dynamic-signal-analysis-review-part-3-aliasing/




                                                                                                                                             To prevent aliasing need to
                                                                                                                                             sample at 𝑓! ≥ 2 𝑓"#$ + ∆𝑓


                                                                                                                           fmax + ∆f



                                                                                                       These frequencies will be




                                                                                                                                                                                       https://visionbook.mit.edu/sampling_and_aliasing.html
                                                                                                        aliased (folded) into the
                                                                                                             sampled signal




                                                                                                                      18




                                                                                              The top left figure shows the spectrum of a realistic, implementable anti-aliasing
                                                                                              filter. There is significant frequency content greater than fmax that will be aliased,
                                                                                              folded into the sampled signal. This distorts the desired signals.

                                                                                              The answer is to over-sample, sample at more than twice the Nyquist frequency.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               18
Practical Considerations
• Aliasing:
   • Different continuous frequencies become indistinguishable after sampling
   • Once aliased, information is irreversibly lost
• Common mitigation strategies:
   • Analogue low-pass (anti-alias) filtering
   • Oversampling
   • Digital decimation after filtering
                                           • In embedded systems:
                                                • Sampling rate often constrained by:
                                                   • ADC speed
                                                   • DMA bandwidth
                                                   • CPU processing time
                                                                           Made with help from ChatGPT   19




                                                                                                              19
Analogue-to-Digital Convertor (ADC)

• An ADC takes an input analogue signal, samples it, and outputs the
  samples as digital words




                                                                         Parallel output (8-bits)
• In general, the faster the ADC samples, the  Analogue
                                               signal in
  fewer the number of bit out                             ADC
• An N-bit ADC can quantize the input signal
  to 2N levels
  • Usually, they represent values that are symmetric Analogue




                                                                         Serial output (SPI)
    about 0 volts                                      signal in
                                                                   ADC
  • If the maximum voltage swing is ±X volts, the
    digital output range is approximately [-2N-1,2N-1] volts

                                                                                                    20




                                                                                                         20
 Digital-to-Analogue Convertor (DAC)

 • A DAC converts digital values to analogue signals
 • In general, the faster the ADC samples, the




                                                                                   Parallel input (8-bits)
                                                                                                                   Analogue
   fewer the number of input bits                                                                                  signal out
 • The more input bits, the higher the fidelity of the                                                       DAC
   output analogue signal
 • Similar to the ADC, a filter is required for the
                                                                                                                   Analogue
   output signal




                                                                                    Serial input (SPI)
                                                                                                                   signal out
                                                                                                             DAC


                                                                                                                      21
               https://dwellangle.wordpress.com/2008/05/21/quantization-in-adcs/




The output of the DAC, exaggerated here for a 3-bit DAC, contains a lot of high
frequency components




                                                                                                                                21
  Non-ideal DAC Operation




       https://dwellangle.wordpress.com/2008/05/21/quantization-in-adcs/




                                                                           https://www.analog.com/en/resources/technical-articles/equalizing-techniques-flatten-dac-frequency-response.html   22




Ideally, the reconstructed signal is the original analogue signal multiplied by a
sequence of delta functions. This leads to the spectrum of the original signal
repeated every fs Hz.

Two things about that; first, we can’t have a continuum of amplitudes, and second we
can’t make a delta function.

We approximate the desired signal by a discrete convolution with a narrow rectangle
pulse.

The result in the frequency domain is the multiplication of the fourier transform of
the rectangle, a Sinc function, with the repeated spectrum.

Similar to the aliased signal from the ADC operation, the output of the DAC will
contain unwanted content from the repeated signals.

We need to low-pass filter the signal, ideally a “brick wall” filter with cutoff of fs/2

Multiplication in the time domain is the same as convolution in the frequency




                                                                                                                                                                                                   22
domain. We see this clearly in figure d) where the




                                                     22
 Non-ideal DAC Operation




                                   https://www.analog.com/en/resources/technical-articles/equalizing-techniques-flatten-dac-frequency-response.html   23




Here we see the practical signal processing chain with the lowpass “reconstruction”
filter following the DAC




                                                                                                                                                           23
                                                                                 24




This is a DAC that outputs a fixed sinusoid. The green plot is the time-domain
waveform while the red plot is the log frequency spectrum. The fundamental
frequency of about 50 Hz is easy to see.

The output capacitor acts as a lowpass filter.




                                                                                      24
                                                                                 25




This is a DAC that outputs a fixed sinusoid. The green plot is the time-domain
waveform while the red plot is the log frequency spectrum. The fundamental
frequency of about 50 Hz is easy to see.

The output capacitor has been removed and we see the quantized time-domain
signal. The spectrum now contains tons of extra frequencies, repeated every 50 Hz.

Yuck!




                                                                                      25
 Analogue-to-Analogue processing




                                                                            26
                                  Illustration by Mark Wickert, PhD




This diagram illustrates practical blocks for both ADC and DAC operations




                                                                                 26
Summary
• The real world is inherently analogue, but digital systems dominate modern computing
  due to their robustness, scalability, and ease of processing; ADCs and DACs are needed
• Sampling theory describes how continuous-time signals are converted into discrete-time
  sequences using a fixed sampling frequency
• The Nyquist–Shannon sampling theorem defines the minimum sampling rate required to
  avoid aliasing; insufficient sampling causes irreversible distortion of digital signals
• Practical ADC systems employ band-limiting filters for input signal to reduce unwanted
  aliased signals
• Practical ADC systems involve trade-offs between sampling rate, resolution, noise, and
  embedded constraints such as ADC speed, DMA bandwidth, and CPU capacity
• DACs reconstruct analogue signals from digital values but introduce high-frequency
  artifacts, making reconstruction filtering essential for producing clean analogue outputs

                                                                                         27




                                                                                              27
Next Lecture

• Motion control
• Stepper and DC motors
• HW controllers, H-bridge




                             28




                                  28
Questions




            https://xkcd.com/26/   29




                                        29
